practicum/as01_cytoscape_movie.md, before:

# Assignment 01: Network generation and display

## Materials

For this assignment you need the file [movie_metadata.csv](data/movie_metadata.csv) which contains information about 5,000 movies.

## Task

The task is to write Python code that creates CSV files. The CSV files should describe graphs, including connections and attributes.

1. A movie-movie graph in which two movies are connected if they share the same director or one actor.

2. An actor-actor graph in which two actors or actresses are connected if they appeared in the same movie.

Then, you will open these CSV files from Cytoscape to visualize them.

## Mandatory attributes

### Movie attributes

For movie colors, use their genre (use the first genre if a list of genres is given).

For sizes of movies, you can use their `imdb_score` (a proxy for quality), `num_user_for_reviews` (a proxy for popularity),  `gross` (the total amount of money earned through tickets) or a combination of them.

### Actor attributes

Actor colors represent their dominant genre (the most common genre in the list of genres of the movies they appear on). Note that to compute actor colors you need all genres of the movies, not just the first genre.

For sizes of actors/actresses you can use their number of likes in Facebook, or the number of movies in which they have acted.

## Optional attributes

You can also include edge attributes, e.g., thicker edges for links connecting actors who collaborate in many movies.

You can use different node shapes for different clusters obtained using clustering.

Feel free to also create graphs mixing movies and actors, or to create sub-graphs that illustrate something specific (e.g., the sub-graph of all horror movies, or all comedy movies).

# Deliver (groups of two)

A .zip or .tar.gz file containing your report and code.

The report should be an insightful, informative, readable, beautiful, clear, concise two-pages document in PDF with images from Cytoscape and your findings. Be creative. Feel free to focus on a sub-category of movies or actors if you have some interesting finding to report on them.

The code should contain the Python code (Python notebook) that you wrote.

**Both members of the group should learn Python**, as we will continue using Python throughout the course, hence, make sure you are not given non-Python tasks only in the division of work.

The report should end with the following statement: **We hereby declare that, except for the code provided by the course instructors, all of our code, report, and figures were produced by ourselves.**

Commit message:

What are the four CSV files that should be created

practicum/as01_cytoscape_movie.md, after:

# Assignment 01: Network generation and display

## Materials

For this assignment you need the file [movie_metadata.csv](data/movie_metadata.csv) which contains information about 5,000 movies.

## Task

The task is to write Python code, in a Jupyter Notebook, that reads the `movie_metadata.csv` file and creates four CSV files.

1. The first CSV file should describe the *movie-movie graph* in which two movies are connected if they share the same director or one actor.

2. The second CSV file should describe the *actor-actor graph* in which two actors or actresses are connected if they appeared in the same movie.

3. The third CSV file should describe *movie attributes*

4. The fourth CSV file should describe *actor attributes*

Then, you will open these CSV files from Cytoscape to visualize them.

This is similar to what you did in one of the practices, but instead of creating the CSV files by hand, you create them using Python.

## Mandatory attributes

### Movie attributes

For movie colors, use their genre (use the first genre if a list of genres is given).

For sizes of movies, you can use their `imdb_score` (a proxy for quality), `num_user_for_reviews` (a proxy for popularity),  `gross` (the total amount of money earned through tickets) or a combination of them.

### Actor attributes

Actor colors represent their dominant genre (the most common genre in the list of genres of the movies they appear on). Note that to compute actor colors you need all genres of each movie, not just their first genre.

For sizes of actors/actresses you can use their number of likes in Facebook, or the number of movies in which they have acted.

## Optional attributes

You can also include edge attributes, e.g., thicker edges for links connecting actors who collaborate in many movies.

You can use different node shapes for different clusters obtained using clustering (using the ModuLand plug-in).

Feel free to also create graphs mixing movies and actors, or to create sub-graphs that illustrate something specific (e.g., the sub-graph of all horror movies, or all comedy movies).

# Deliver (groups of two)

A .zip or .tar.gz file containing your report and code.

The report should be an insightful, informative, readable, beautiful, clear, concise two-pages document in PDF with images from Cytoscape and your findings. Be creative. Feel free to focus on a sub-category of movies or actors if you have some interesting finding to report on them.

The code should be the Python notebook (.ipynb file) that you wrote.

**Both members of the group should learn Python**, as we will continue using Python throughout the course, hence, make sure you are not given non-Python tasks only in the division of work.

The report should end with the following statement: **We hereby declare that, except for the code provided by the course instructors, all of our code, report, and figures were produced by ourselves.**
