practicum/README.md, before:

# Practicum

## Practice sessions

Practice sessions are conducted in a computer lab and, as a general rule, are delivered individually at the end of each session.

There are 09 practice sessions in this course. Handouts for each session start with *psNN* and describe the activities that the students must perform during the practice session.

At the end of each handout there is a description of what you should deliver.

**Important note for the evaluation**: as a data scientist your reports and code should be (among other things) correct, easily understandable, pristine, and pleasant to look at. Check your code and results as many times as needed to ensure they are correct, and be careful with the presentation of your work. For instance, do not use low-quality screenshots, or poorly cropped screenshots showing toolbars and window borders; instead, export and save high-quality images from each application.

## Assignments

Assignments, as a general rule, are done in pairs.

There are 3 assignments in this course. Assignment descriptions start with "asNN".

Commit message:

What to deliver (one page report instead of one image)

practicum/README.md, after:

# Practicum

## Practice sessions

Practice sessions are conducted in a computer lab and, as a general rule, are delivered individually at the end of each session.

There are 09 practice sessions in this course. Handouts for each session start with *psNN* and describe the activities that the students must perform during the practice session.

At the end of each handout there is a description of what you should deliver.

## Assignments

Assignments, as a general rule, are done in pairs.

There are 3 assignments in this course. Assignment descriptions start with "asNN".

# Guidelines for submitting your work

Each practice session and assignment specifies what you should submit. Read it carefully to ensure that you are including everything that was asked.

Identify the authorship and date of each report with a paragraph on the first page (or with a cover page for longer reports), including the report's title or purpose, the author name(s) and e-mail(s), and the date in which the report was completed. Include the same as a comment at the top of each source code file you deliver.

Check your code and results as many times as needed to ensure they are correct. State clearly your assumptions and limitations.

Be precise: number sections hierarchically (1, 1.1, 1.1.1), number every figure, table, and equation, and refer to sections, figures, tables, and equations by their number. Do not include ambiguous statements or plots without a scale.

Be careful with the presentation of your work. For instance, do not use low-quality screenshots, or poorly cropped screenshots showing toolbars and window borders. Instead, export and save high-quality images from each application.

As a data scientist your reports and code should be (among other things) correct, understandable, pristine, and pleasant to look at. Ensure you set aside enough time to review, improve, and polish your work. Get used to produce top-quality work and it will become a habit.
